SOURCE: Week 3 — Charter Granted by Queen Elizabeth to the East India Company, 31 December 1600
URL: https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.501596/page/n17/mode/2up
Alternate source: British History Online via oneandallwisdom.com

CHARTER GRANTED BY QUEEN ELIZABETH TO THE FIRST EAST INDIA COMPANY
DATED 31ST DECEMBER 1600

[From the Wikisource abstract of "A Collection of Charters and Statutes relating to the East India Company"]

AN ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS GRANTED TO THE EAST INDIA COMPANY

THE FIRST CHARTER FOR ERECTING AN EAST INDIA COMPANY, dated 31st December, 1600.

An Abstract of the First Charter. On the last Day of the Year 1600, being in the 43d Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, was issued the first Royal Charter for erecting an East India Company. By this Charter the Queen, (upon the Petition of the Earl of Cumberland, and Two hundred and fifteen other Persons, amongst whom were several Knights and Aldermen of London, praying the Queen's Licence to adventure and set forth one or more Voyages, by way of Traffic and Merchandize, to the East Indies, in the Countries and Parts of Asia, and Africa, and to the Islands thereabouts; divers of which Countries and Islands had been long since discovered, though not frequented in Trade of Merchandize;) incorporated the said Earl, and other Persons, by the name of "The Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading into the East Indies." — To be one Body politic and corporate; to have Succession; to purchase Lands [without any Limitation]; to have one Governor, and Twenty-four Persons, to be elected annually, who shall be called Committees, and shall jointly have the Direction of the Voyages, the Provision of the Shipping and Merchandize, also the Sale of the Merchandize, and the Management of all other Things belonging to the said Company. Sir Thomas Smith, Alderman of London, was to be the first Governor; a Deputy Governor to be elected in a general Court; both the Governors and all the Committees to take an Oath of fidelity. Also every Member to take an Oath, before he be admitted to traffic as a Freeman of the Company. The Company, their Sons (at twenty-one Years of Age), their Apprentices, Servants, and Factors in India, or elsewhere, may, for Fifteen Years from Christmas last, freely and solely Trade, by such Ways and Passages as are already found out, or which shall hereafter be discovered, "into the Countries and Parts of Asia and Africa, and into and from all the Islands, Ports, Towns, and Places of Asia, Africa, and America, or any of them, beyond the Cape of Bona Esperanza, to the Streights of Magellan, where any Traffic of Merchandize may be used, and to and from every of them;" in such Manner as shall, from Time to Time, be limited and agreed on at any public Assembly or general Court of the Company; any Statute, Usage, Diversity of Religion or Faith, or any other Matter, to the contrary notwithstanding; so as it be not to any country already possessed by any Christian Potentate in amity with Her Majesty, who shall declare the same to be against his or her good Liking. Either the Governor or Deputy Governor must always be one in general Assemblies. In those Assemblies they may make all reasonable Constitutions, &c. agreeable to the Laws of England, for their good Government, by plurality of Voices; and may punish, by Fines and Imprisonment, any Offenders against such Laws. The Queen grants to the Company an exemption from paying any Customs upon Exports for the first four Voyages; and for Customs which shall be payable for Imports from India, the Company shall be allowed to give their Bonds, payable one half in Six Months, and the other half in Six Months after. For Merchandize lost at sea, outward bound, the Customs shall be allowed to the Company out of the next Cargo shipped off. Indian Merchandize that shall have paid the Customs, may, until the end of Thirteen Months, be re-exported by any Subjects.

[From the Calendar of State Papers Colonial, East Indies, China and Japan, Vol. 2, 1513-1616, ed. W Noel Sainsbury (London, 1864), pp. 113-118]

Dec 31. Westminster. Charter of incorporation of the East India Company by the name of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading into the East Indies. "A privilege for fifteen years granted by Her Majesty to certain adventurers for the discovery of the trade for the East Indies;" to Geo. Earl of Cumberland, and two hundred and fifteen knights, aldermen, and merchants.

[The charter names include: Sir John Hart, Robt. Lee, Thos. Smythe, Thos. Cambell, Sir John Spencer, Leonard Holliday, Sir Edward Michelborne, John Watts, John Moore, Wm. Cavendishe, Edward Holmeden, Edward Barker, Paul Bannynge, Robt. Hampson, Thos. Marsh, Sam. Backhowse, Wm. Jennynges, John Wragge, Jas. Lancaster, Gyles Paslowe, Wm. Dale, Rich. Staper, Robt. Bell, Lawrence Waldoe, Thos. Cordell, Thos. White, Hen. Bridgman, Wm. Garwey, Nicholas Lynge, Sam. Armitage, Oliver Style, Wm. Palmer, Edward Harrison, Wm. Quarles, Ellis Crippes, Edmond Nicholson, Bartholomew Barnes, Geo. Bolles, Wm. Offley, Nic. Crispe, Clement Mosley, Robt. Chamberlain, John Newman, John Harby, Hump. Wallcott, Rich. Wiseman, John Merricke, Thos. Richardson, Wm. Stone, Hump. Handforde, Thos. Boothby, Fras. Cherie, Thos. Simondes, John Couchman, Thos. Allabaster, Robt. Cockes, Rich. Barret, Wm. Wastall, Reynold Greene, John Swinarton the younger, John Humphrey, Robt. Mildmay, Thos. Garwey, Thos. Bostocke, Wm. Hynde, Bart. Hollande, Geo. Chandlor, Wm. Romeny, Ric. Cockes, Edward Lutterforde, Jas. Deane, Wm. Walton, Wm. Barret, John Eldred, Wm. Freeman, Step. Harvy, And. Banninge, Thos. Southacke, Thos. Henshawe, Edward Leanynge, John Frier, Wm. Ferris, Fras. Dent, Wm. Aldersey, Thos. Juxon, Ric. Balle, Wm. Hewitt, Ric. Pierce, Wm. Fisher, Nich. Leate, Roger Heaminge, Jos. Salbucke, John Wolstenholme, Nic. Pearde, Robt. Cobbe, Wm. Chamber, Robt. Robinson, Nic. Manley, Rowland Backhowse, Fras. Evington, Nic. Salter, Hump. Smith, Fras. Taylor, Wm. Willaston, Robt. Sandy, Thos. Westwray, Wm. Angel, Hen. Robinson, Nic. Barnealy, Rich. Pointell, John Midleton, John Hawkins, John Highlorde, Robt. Gore, Roger Dye, Wm. Harrison, Raphe Gore, Ric. Clarke, Hum. Style, Wm. Cater, Thos. Hewitt, Hump. Robinson, Geo. Cater, George Whitmore, Nic. Ferror, John Busbridge, Hen. Polsteade, Thos. Farrington, Thos. Horton, John Combe, Wm. Bond, Wm. Greenwell, Robt. Offley, Wm. Cotton, Robt. Johnson, Roger Howe, John Stockley, Bart. Hagget, John Hewitt, Roger Ofield, Jas. Turner, Augustine Skinner, Hump. Basse, Morris Abbot, Ric. Wiche, Robt. Bucke, Robt. Careill, Robt. Towerson, Ambrose Wheeler, Ric. Talby, Wm. Hale, Robt. Brooke, Robt. Midleton, Rich. Hale junior, Ric. Chamberlain, Robt. Bateman, Geo. Chamberlain, Ric. Gosson, John Hodgson, Leonard White, Robt. Waldoe, Alfonsus Fowle, John Cornelius, Raphe Busby, Ric. Wragge, Edmund Spencer, Ric. Piott, Thos. Talbott, Ric. Deane, Wm. Bonham, Robt. Pennington, Ric. Ironsyde, Edward Barkham, Hump. Milwarde, Geo. Smythes, Geo. Colles, Ric. Hearne, Jas. Dunkin, Raphe Hamor, Raphe Allen, Edw. Walter, Jas. Cullimore, John Brooke, And. Chamberlain, Ant. Gibson, Robt. Stratford, Samuel Hare, Robt. Kayes, Ant. Stratford, Geo. Utley, Hugh Crumpton, Wm. Millett, Simon Lawrence, Ric. Washer, Thos. Lydall, Gregory Allen, Geo. Holman, Step. Hodgson, Hen. Archer, Morrice Llewellin, Ric. Wrighte, Jeffrey Kyrby, Ric. Persons, Wm. Starky, John Cason, Wm. Smyth, Ric. Beale, Fras. Barker, John Ellacot, Thos. Shipton, Wm. Tumor, Robt. Bayly, John Fletcher, John Greenwoode, Roger Cotton]

KEY TERMS OF THE CHARTER:

1. Licence at their own costs and charges to set forth one or more voyages to the East Indies, in the countries and parts of Asia and Africa, and to the islands thereabouts.

2. To have succession and purchase lands without limitation; to have a common seal.

3. Sir Thos. Smythe, alderman, to be the first governor. Twenty-four committees to be elected annually, jointly to have the direction of the voyages, the provision of shipping, and merchandise.

4. A deputy governor to be chosen in a general court; each to take the oath of fidelity, and to be elected within the first six days in July in each year.

5. Every member of the Company to take an oath before being admitted to traffic as a freeman of the Company.

6. Privileges to the sons, apprentices, servants, and factors in India of the adventurers.

7. The governor or deputy governor always to be present at general assemblies when reasonable laws, constitutions, etc., agreeably to the laws of England, may be made, and offenders against them punished by fine or imprisonment.

8. Exemption from paying customs for the first four voyages; to be allowed to give their bonds payable at six and twelve months for customs afterwards payable for merchandise from India.

9. Liberty to export in each voyage thirty thousand pounds in foreign coin or bullion; so as at least 6,000l. be first coined at the Mint.

10. To send yearly to the East Indies six good ships and six pinnaces with 500 mariners, unless the royal navy go forth.

11. None of the Queen's subjects, but the Company, their servants, and assigns, to resort to India without the Company's licence upon pain of forfeiting ships and cargoes, half to the Queen and half to the Company, with imprisonment till the offenders give 1,000l. bond not to trade thither again.

12. Power to grant licences to trade to the East Indies.

13. Apprentices, servants, factors, etc., may be admitted to the freedom of the Company by the majority.

14. Silver exported to be shipped only at the ports of London, Dartmouth, and Plymouth, and duly entered by the Custom House officers without paying customs.

15. If this charter shall not appear profitable to the crown and realm it may cease after two years' notice; if otherwise, the Queen promises at the end of this term to grant the Company a new charter for another fifteen years.

July 1. Court Minutes of the East India Company. Sir Thos. Smythe elected governor, Wm. Greenwell deputy governor.